On an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man came out of the garret in which he lodged in S. 
Place and walked slowly, as though in hesitation, towards K. bridge.
He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase. His garret was under the roof of a high, 
five-storied house and was more like a cupboard than a room. The landlady who provided him with garret, dinners, 
and attendance, lived on the floor below, and every time he went out he was obliged to pass her kitchen, the 
door of which invariably stood open. And each time he passed, the young man had a sick, frightened feeling,
which made him scowl and feel ashamed. He was hopelessly in debt to his landlady, and was afraid of meeting her.
This was not because he was cowardly and abject, quite the contrary; but for some time past he had been in an 
overstrained irritable condition, verging on hypochondria. He had become so completely absorbed in himself,
and isolated from his fellows that he dreaded meeting, not only his landlady, but anyone at all. He was 
crushed by poverty, but the anxieties of his position had of late ceased to weigh upon him. He had given 
up attending to matters of practical importance; he had lost all desire to do so. Nothing that any landlady 
could do had a real terror for him. But to be stopped on the stairs, to be forced to listen to her trivial, 
irrelevant gossip, to pestering demands for payment, threats and complaints, and to rack his brains for excuses, 
to prevaricate, to lie—no, rather than that, he would creep down the stairs like a cat and slip out unseen.
This evening, however, on coming out into the street, he became acutely aware of his fears.
“I want to attempt a thing like that and am frightened by these trifles,” he thought, with an odd 
smile. “Hm... yes, all is in a man’s hands and he lets it all slip from cowardice, that’s an axiom. It would 
be interesting to know what it is men are most afraid of. Taking a new step, uttering a new word is what they 
fear most.... But I am talking too much. It’s because I chatter that I do nothing. Or perhaps it is that I 
chatter because I do nothing. I’ve learned to chatter this last month, lying for days together in my den 
thinking... of Jack the Giant-killer. Why am I going there now? Am I capable of that? Is that serious? It is 
not serious at all. It’s simply a fantasy to amuse myself; a plaything! Yes, maybe it is a plaything.”
The heat in the street was terrible: and the airlessness, the bustle and the plaster, scaffolding, bricks, 
and dust all about him, and that special Petersburg stench, so familiar to all who are unable to get out of 
town in summer—all worked painfully upon the young man’s already overwrought nerves. The insufferable stench 
from the pot-houses, which are particularly numerous in that part of the town, and the drunken men whom he met 
continually, although it was a working day, completed the revolting misery of the picture. An expression of the 
profoundest disgust gleamed for a moment in the young man’s refined face. He was, by the way, exceptionally handsome, 
above the average in height, slim, well-built, with beautiful dark eyes and dark brown hair. Soon he sank into 
deep thought, or more accurately speaking into a complete blankness of mind; he walked along not observing what 
was about him and not caring to observe it. From time to time, he would mutter something, from the habit of talking 
to himself, to which he had just confessed. At these moments he would become conscious that his ideas were sometimes 
in a tangle and that he was very weak; for two days he had scarcely tasted food.
He was so badly dressed that even a man accustomed to shabbiness would have been ashamed to be seen in the street in 
such rags. In that quarter of the town, however, scarcely any shortcoming in dress would have created surprise. Owing 
to the proximity of the Hay Market, the number of establishments of bad character, the preponderance of the trading 
and working class population crowded in these streets and alleys in the heart of Petersburg, types so various were 
to be seen in the streets that no figure, however queer, would have caused surprise. But there was such accumulated 
bitterness and contempt in the young man’s heart, that, in spite of all the fastidiousness of youth, he minded 
his rags least of all in the street. It was a different matter when he met with acquaintances or with former 
fellow students, whom, indeed, he disliked meeting at any time. And yet when a drunken man who, for some 
unknown reason, was being taken somewhere in a huge waggon dragged by a heavy dray horse, suddenly shouted at him 
as he drove past: “Hey there, German hatter” bawling at the top of his voice and pointing at him—the young man 
stopped suddenly and clutched tremulously at his hat. It was a tall round hat from Zimmerman’s, but completely worn 
out, rusty with age, all torn and bespattered, brimless and bent on one side in a most unseemly fashion. Not shame, 
however, but quite another feeling akin to terror had overtaken him.
“I knew it,” he muttered in confusion, “I thought so! That’s the worst of all! Why, a stupid thing like this, the 
most trivial detail might spoil the whole plan. Yes, my hat is too noticeable.... It looks absurd and that makes 
it noticeable.... With my rags I ought to wear a cap, any sort of old pancake, but not this grotesque thing. Nobody 
wears such a hat, it would be noticed a mile off, it would be remembered.... What matters is that people would 
remember it, and that would give them a clue. For this business one should be as little conspicuous as possible....
Trifles, trifles are what matter! Why, it’s just such trifles that always ruin everything....”
